Updates for SD-CWT (#3)
mesur-io/ietf-misc: editor_drafts/draft-prorock-spice-cose-sd-cwt.md

.# Abstract

> This document describes a data minimization technique of use with CBOR Web Token (CWT) [@!RFC8392].

Author: ```suggestion
This document describes a data minimization technique for use with CBOR Web Token (CWT) [@!RFC8392].
```

The approach is based on SD-JWT, with changes to align with CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (cose).

> This document updates RFC8392.

Author: This is very debatable, but I feel that CWT should come with "batteries included", and I believe selective disclosure and related claims are just as fundamental to what a CWT is as the claims in the original RFC... I'd also like to avoid some of the challenges we've seen with SD-JWT, where its "not a JWT", but also sorta a JWT.

# Terminology

The terminology used in this document is inherited from RFC8392, RFC9052 and RFC9053.

This document defines the following new terms related to concepts originally described in SD-JWT.

sd_cwt
: A CWT equivalent of an SD-JWT. Unlike SD-JWT, SD-CWT is not a new token type, it is a profile of CWT. This is the CWT equivalent of application/sd-jwt.

sd_kbt

> : A CWT used to demonstrate possession of a confirmation method, associated to an SD-CWT. This is the CWT equivalent of application/kb+jwt.

Author: I tried to avoid them so far, but it's possible it's easier to understand if we use that terminology.

sd_claims

> : The claims disclosed via an SD-CWT. In compact SD-JWT, these are encoded using the `~`.

Reviewer: why mention SD-JWT at all?

> sd_claims
> : The claims disclosed via an SD-CWT. In compact SD-JWT, these are encoded using the `~`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Disclosures
: The salted claims disclosed via an SD-CWT. They are included in the `sd_claims` array in the unprotected header.
```

> : The claims disclosed via an SD-CWT. In compact SD-JWT, these are encoded using the `~`.

Reviewer 2: > why mention SD-JWT at all?

@brentzundel that's a great question. I thought there might be some folks who already implemented SD-JWT that go implement SD-CWT for performance or interop with more types of systems. Unless IETF plans on deprecating SD-JWT, I think it makes sense to keep it in. It's always easiest to remove something later than to add it back in.

> : The claims disclosed via an SD-CWT. In compact SD-JWT, these are encoded using the `~`.

Author: I like the idea of an appendix section comparing them.

I agree it will be distracting to keep comparing them throughout the document.

> : The claims disclosed via an SD-CWT. In compact SD-JWT, these are encoded using the `~`.

Author: https://github.com/mesur-io/ietf-misc/issues/4

redacted_keys

> : The claims redacted in a map data structure. In SD-JWT, this label is the object property "_sd".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: The hashes of claims redacted from a map data structure.
```

redacted_element

> : The elements redacted in an array data structure. In SD-JWT, this label is the object property "...".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: The hashes of elements redacted from an array data structure. 
```

  │                                      │◄─────────────────────────────────────────┤     
  │                                      │             Receive Nonce                │     
  │                                      ├───┐                                      │     
  │                                      │   │ Redact Claims                        │     
  │                                      │◄──┘                                      │     
  │                                      │                                          │     
  │                                      ├───┐                                      │     
  │                                      │   │ Demonstrate                          │     
  │                                      │◄──┘ Posession                            │     
  │                                      │                                          │     
  │                                      │             Present SD-CWT               │     
  │                                      ├─────────────────────────────────────────►│     
  │                                      │                                          │     
```

> This diagram captures the essential details necessary to issue and present and SD-CWT.

Author: ```suggestion
This diagram captures the essential details necessary to issue and present an SD-CWT.
```

The parameters necessary to support these processes can be obtained using transports or protocols which are out of scope for this specification.

> However the following guidance is generally recommneded regardless of protocol or transport.

Author: ```suggestion
However the following guidance is generally recommended, regardless of protocol or transport.
```

1. The issuer SHOULD confirm the holder controls all confirmation material before issuing credentials using the `cnf` claim.

> 2. The verifier SHOULD use a nonce (cnonce), to protect against replay attacks. 

Author: ```suggestion
2. The verifier SHOULD validate a nonce (cnonce), to protect against replay attacks. 
```

## Creating an SD-CWT

SD-CWT is modeled after SD-JWT, with adjustments to align with conventions in CBOR and COSE.

An SD-CWT is a CWT containing the hash digests of the claim values combined with unique random salts and additional metadata for disclosed values.

> Unlike SD-JWT, key binding MUST be present in the unprotected header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Holder key binding CWT (see next section) MUST be present in a `sd_kbt` claim in the unprotected header when presenting an SD-CWT to a Verifier.
```

There does not exist a concept of "SD-CWT without key binding".

> The following informative CDDL is provided.

Author: The reason I chose informative here, is I need examples map and arrays to show the redact syntax and those examples are not normative to SD-CWT, they are just examples

Please note this example contains claims for demonstration of the disclosure syntax, such as `swversion`.

`sd_kbt` is marked optional because it is not present after issuance, however is MUST be present in all subsequent presentations of the sd-cwt.

``` cddl
sd-cwt = [
  protected,
  unprotected: {
    ?(sd_claims: TBD): bstr .cbor [ + claim-pair],
    ?(sd_kbt: TBD): bstr .cbor sd-cwt-kbt,
  },
  payload :  bstr .cbor {
    &(iss: 1) => tstr, ; "https://issuer.example"
    &(sub: 2) => tstr, ; "https://device.example"
    &(aud: 3) => tstr, ; "https://verifier.example"
    &(exp: 4) => int,  ; 1883000000
    &(nbf: 5) => int,  ; 1683000000
    &(iat: 6) => int,  ; 1683000000
    &(cnf: 8) => sd-cwt-cnf,  ; 1683000000

    ; sd-cwt new claims
    &(sd_alg: TBD) => int,            ; -16 for sha-256

>     &(redacted_keys: TBD) => [ bstr ] ; redacted map key

Author: I was not planning on implementing a different algorithm from what sd-jwt uses, which is recursive redactions, of the map, list, and scalars AST, that common to JSON, YAML and cbor.

>     &(redacted_keys: TBD) => [ bstr ] ; redacted map key

Author: https://github.com/mesur-io/ietf-misc/issues/5

    &(swversion: 271) => [              ; example array
      ...,
      {
        &(redacted_element: TBD) => bstr ; redacted array element
      }
      ...
    ]      
  }
  signature : bstr,
]
```

> Disclosures are structured as a "sd-cwt-claim-pair" with a 32 bit salt, and the byte string of the disclosed value.

Author: This is better than what I had, I will need to apply it, when not doing a code review on my phone.

> Disclosures are structured as a "sd-cwt-claim-pair" with a 32 bit salt, and the byte string of the disclosed value.

Author: I'm going to defer more changes to the next PR, but this is tracked here: https://github.com/mesur-io/ietf-misc/issues/5

``` cddl
sd-cwt-claim-pair = [

>   uint .size 4,  ; 32-bit salt

Author: I believe this comes from sd-jwt, the goal was for them to be the same size, but it's possible this example is not correct.

>   uint .size 4,  ; 32-bit salt

Author: You are correct. https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt-08#section-10.4

>   uint .size 4,  ; 32-bit salt

Author: ```suggestion
  ; The RECOMMENDED minimum length 
  ; of the randomly-generated portion of the salt is 128 bits
  uint .size 16,  
```

``` cddl-ish
{
  &(digest_of_salt_and_disclosure: bstr) => sd-cwt-claim-pair-disclosed-value
}
```

The verifier MUST compute the hash of the sd-cwt-claim-pair, in order to match the disclosed value to redacted claims in the SD-CWT.

To verify an SD-CWT, the recipient extracts the protected CWT claims from the payload. 
These CWT claims contain hash digests of the original claim values combined with unique random salts.

By performing these steps, the recipient can cryptographically verify the integrity of the protected claims and verify they have not been tampered with or substituted after issuance by the trusted issuer. 
The disclosures provide the plaintext claim values for utilization by the recipient.

The algorithm for transorming the CWT Claimset mirrors the algorithm defined in SD-JWT.
The primary differences are that CBOR maps have replaced JSON Objects, and that CBOR labels (integers) have replaced the strings used by SD-JWT which are `_sd` and `...`.
This specification uses the term `validated_presented_sd_claims` to refer to the final CBOR map which is produced by subsituting disclosed values which are presented, and removing labels marked for redaction.

> As described in SD-JWT, if there remain unused SD-CWT disclosures at the end of this procedure the SD-CWT MUST be considered invalid, as if the siganture had failed to verify.

Reviewer: I would find it much clearer if the algorithm for transforming the CWT Claimset were described plainly, without reference to SD-JWT.

The audience of this document will likely include people who aren't deeply familiar with SD-JWT, and for them the reference to SD-JWT will likely be confusing rather than enlightening.

Author: We'll end up repeating a lot of the sd-jwt draft text. I'm fine doing that, and I think it's the right thing to do eventually, but I didn't want to do it in this PR.

## Examples

TBD - Provide more examples

### Minimal spanning example

The following example contains claims needed to demonstrate redaction of key-value pairs and array elements.

> ``` cbor-diag
> / cose-sign1 / 18([
>   / protected / << {
>     / alg / 1 : -35 / ES384 /
>     / typ / 16 : "application/sd+cwt"
>   } >>,
>   / unprotected / {
>     / sd_claims / TBD : h'82501bb4...6c655f32'
>     / sd_kbt    / TBD : << [
>       / protected / << {
>           / alg / 1 : -35 / ES384 /
>           / typ / 16 : "application/kb+cwt"
>       } >>,
>       / unprotected / {},
>       / payload / <<
>         / cnonce / 39   : h'e0a156bb3f',
>         / aud     / 3   : "https://verifier.example",
>         / iat     / 6   : 1783000000,
>         / sd_hash / TBD : h'c341bb4...a5f3f',
>       >>,
>       / signature / h'1237af2e...6789456'
>     ] >>
>   },
>   / payload / <<
>     / iss / 1   : "https://issuer.example",
>     / sub / 2   : "https://device.example",
>     / exp / 2   : 1883000000,
>     / iat / 2   : 1683000000,
>     / cnf / 8   : {
>       / cose key / 1 : {
>         / alg: ES256 /  3: 35,
>         / kty: EC2   /  1: 2,
>         / crv: P-256 / -1: 1,
>         / x / -2: h'768ed8...8626e',
>         / y / -3: h'6a48cc...fd5d5'
>       }
>     },
> 
>     / sd_alg / TBD        : -16, / SHA-256 /
>     / redacted_keys / TBD : [ 
>       / redacted age_over_18 / h'abbd...efef',
>       / redacted age_over_21 / h'132d...75e7',
>     ]
>     / swversion / 271 : [
>       "3.5.5",
>       { / redacted version / TBD: h'45dd...87af }
>     ]
>   >>,
>   / signature / h'3337af2e...66959614'
> ])
> ```

Reviewer 2: I made a few changes. 

- I put the disclosed values in sd_claims of the SD-CWT
- I added sd_alg to the kwt (since it also has a hash
- I replaced on array element TBD with "...". I think this needs to be something unusual like "..." because it is inside an arbitrary array that IETF does not control.
- I added an example of a disclosure inside a deeper level of the SD-CWT hierarchy
- I added a kid to the SD-CWT
- assigned all the TBD assignments to TBD1, TBD2, etc.
- moved some comments about values to the right side of the value

```suggestion
``` cbor-diag
/ cose-sign1 / 18([
  / protected / << {
    / alg / 1  : -35 / ES384 /
    / typ / 16 : "application/sd+cwt"
    / kid /    : 'https://issuer.example/cwt-key3'
  } >>,
  / unprotected / {
    / sd_claims / TBD1 : [  /these are the three disclosures/
        <<[
            /salt/   h'c93c7ff5...72c71e26',
            /claim/  "age_over_18",
            /value/  true
        ]>>,
        <<[
            /salt/   h'399c641e...2aa18c1e',
            /claim/  "region",
            /value/  "ca" /California/
        ]>>,
        <<[
            /salt/   h'82501bb4...6c655f32',
            /value/  "4.1.7"
        ]>>
    ]
    / sd_kbt    / TBD2 : << [
      / protected / << {
          / alg / 1 : -35 / ES384 /
          / typ / 16 : "application/kb+cwt"
      } >>,
      / unprotected / {},
      / payload / <<
        / cnonce / 39    : h'e0a156bb3f',
        / aud     / 3    : "https://verifier.example",
        / iat     / 6    : 1783000000,
        / sd_alg  / TBD4 : -16  /SHA-256/ 
        / sd_hash / TBD3 : h'c341bb...4a5f3f',  /hash of sd_claims   /
                                                /using hash in sd_alg/
      >>,
      / signature / h'1237af2e...6789456'
    ] >>
  },
  / payload / <<
    / iss / 1   : "https://issuer.example",
    / sub / 2   : "https://device.example",
    / exp / 2   : 1883000000,
    / iat / 2   : 1683000000,
    / cnf / 8   : {
      / cose key / 1 : {
        / alg: ES256 /  3: 35,
        / kty: EC2   /  1: 2,
        / crv: P-256 / -1: 1,
        / x / -2: h'768ed8...8626e',
        / y / -3: h'6a48cc...fd5d5'
      }
    },
    / sd_alg / TBD4        : -16, / SHA-256 /
    / redacted_keys / TBD5 : [ 
        h'abbd...efef',  / redacted age_over_18 /
        h'132d...75e7',  / redacted age_over_21 /
    ],
    / swversion / 271 : [
      "3.5.5",
      { "...": h'45dd...87af'  /redacted version element/ }
    ],
    "address": {
        "country" : "us",            / United States /
        /redacted_keys/ TBD5 : [
            h'adb70604...03da225b',  / redacted region /
            h'e04bdfc4...4d3d40bc'   / redacted post_code /
        ]
    }
  >>,
  / signature / h'3337af2e...66959614'
])
```
```

Author: There is some subtle challenge depending on where you CBOR encode the claims, because you want the hash to be over the encoded bytes, but you also want to have the disclosures decoded for application processing.

I would tend to encode the whole disclosure set once << [...], [...], ...> ... vs [ <<>>, <<>> ] ... Because the kwt will contain the hash of the stabilized << [...], [...], ...> ... With no risk of array reordering breaking things.

But we can adjust this further in later pull requests.
